Oh, so _this_ is the language for proving distributed/asynchronous protocols correct!

The basic structure is: a synchronous model in which a set of processes send and receive
messages from each other in synchronous lockstep rounds, and an adversarial network model
that is arbitrarily allowed to essentially introduce partitions. (Notably, just the network is adversarial—byzantine faults are unaccounted for.)

That's the “Heard Of” set. (Is this set different per timestep? The introduction makes it
sound like it's constant for the whole time period. Ah, yes, they are.)

There's a proof of indistinguishability, that essentially says that no process can
distinguish whether it's running on the lockstep model or the real world asynchronous
model. That essentially validates this model as a valid one for proving properties of
protocols under (and it's presumably easier to do so).

The observational refinement proof essentially says that once you define an interface for
asynchronous clients to communicate with the system with, then the allowable traces(?) of
the system as visible to the clients are also allowable under the asynchronous model. This
feels like indistinguishability again, but it's clearly not—sets of allowable traces
forming subset relations is very different from any client being able to distinguish, and
I'm curious about why we need this distinct property here.

A consequence of this approach to verification would seem to be that we would be unable to
verify any set-based property of a PSync program—all we can say is the set of lockstep
runs have that property, but the async runs that refine them are a different (sub)set
altogether.

Ah—so the lockstep semantics let us specify relatively simple inductive properties,
because it's essentially imposing a discretisation on the continuous space of “time” in a
distributed system. Lockstep semantics removes the need to check a probably-exponential
number of interleavings, channels are bounded and there's a bounded number of
them—ultimately, it's a lot of careful but cogent simplifications of the problem domain in
order to move the problem back into tractability.

They also let us identify precisely the liveness requirements we have
to impose on the network to get the liveness properties we care about on the algorithm (as
precisely as we can get within the lockstep semantics, anyway). Interestingly, they're
_time-invariant_—of the form □◇φ for some φ.

They spend a lot of time discussing timeout estimation, and I don't know why I should find
that interesting.
