This is a proof system on distributed programs! Whaaaaaat.

…oh, it's a proof system on casually consistent distributed systems where (almost) all
distributed operations commute. Gotcha.

They add basically a mutex system into the semantics in order to model cases where the
clients are forced to synchronise to satisfy a property. They're not exactly mutexes,
because which tokens conflict with which others is left unrestricted, and in particular,
tokens do _not_ have to conflict with each other. The formalism just requires
happens-before to define _some_ ordering for any operations that use conflicting
tokens. This also allows you to define non-commutative pairs of operations—if you can
guarantee that you're always going to be ordered with another operation, you don't have to
commute with it.

It's interesting how this is essentially a gradated travelling of the path between causal
consistency and sequential consistency—how _much_ of your order is partial? How many
actually concurrent operations do you have? Much of the same behaviour as you get around
mutexes show up here as well—you can split a token into multiple subtokens to get
finer-grained concurrency etc.

The way they make this proof system viable is by associating each token with an
“guarantee”—a description of the possible changes to the state that token is associated
with. Then, during (local) proving, they can assume that all concurrent state
modifications with an operation only satisfy the guarantees for all _nonconflicting_
tokens. In the standard non-negative account balance case, this cashes out to: withdraw
uses a self-conflicting token, and all non-withdraw operations either leave the account
balance the same or increase it, so during a withdraw operation we can assume the account
balance is not less than what we see locally.

I was skeptical when they said that the requirement that operations commute was “not very
taxing”, but they're right—once you have their proof system. You can apply commutativity
(and concurrency) by default, and have a verifiable escape hatch from the commutativity
requirement when you need it.

It'd be interesting to see a standard garbage-collected CRDT specified in this
language. It'd also, of course, be interesting to directly compare this
specification/verification language to the SVO paper's.
