Where have I heard the term “timely dataflow” before…

Naiad is a stream processing language, with support for loops and reasoning about
timestamps. Loops are constrained specifically to ensure they manage timestamps in a
precise, predictable way, and thus the system as a whole can reason about properties like
“there can no longer be messages with timestamp <t at this node”.

I'm not fully confident I understand the timestamps, but they _appear_ to be an epoch
number paired with a vector of loop iteration numbers (a vector to track nested
loops). The loop iteration numbers are marked by specialised loop management nodes; I'm
not sure what updates epochs.

(If I'm reading this right, the user does? But—I don't understand how timestamps are at
all useful for anything other than loops if the user does The Simple Thing and provides
just one epoch of data, then?)

The main benefit of this is that it's a computation model that handles two kinds of
computations—the kind that we normally think of as stream processing, where each input
results in O(1) outputs, and the block-until kind, where a node doesn't output anything
until it's received a guarantee that it's not going to receive any more input (matching
some condition).

This also lets them apply update batching at whichever granularity ends up being
necessary; by default they do so per-process and per-cluster within a given timestamp. The
model allows them to prove that this won't impact correctness, just reduce possible
concurrency.

While it doesn't really impact the programming model per se, I'm pretty intrigued by this
section on the war stories they've fought regarding microstutters. Optimising for
low-latency stream processing across a network is, apparently, a very different beast than
optimising for general code.

Ooh, I like that they can map LINQ onto it! They can also map (much of?) Bloom^L into the
model; though of course the point of Bloom^L was more in what it left out than what it
included. (That said, they do seem to have hit upon a parallel implementation of what
looks like punctuation markers—I can't really tell what the consequences of the
slightly differing implementations here are.)

(Oh, here, they do directly mention punctuation markers—they consider them a different
solution, one that handles blocking computation but not general iteration. That makes
sense.)

I'd like to understand the specifics of when timestamps (within an epoch) matter more, but
overall this paper looks really interesting. It's a genuinely strange programming model
that seems to have genuine advantages.
