Oooh, they're combining monotonic logic with crdts. What does this buy us over just the
monotonic logic framework we've already seen?

Ah—to make their static analysis easy, their original framework only worked on lattices
defined on sets. It couldn't represent the lattice of natural numbers directly, for
instance; the best it could do is the Peano representation.

This paper adds in a framework for analysing general lattices and showing that the data
type grows monotonically, under some partial order. This also is, apparently, a good
framework for programming with CRDTs in general, because you can now ensure your entire
program's use of state is monotone.

(This is probably richer than just the standard “composing two lattices gives you a lattice” guarantee, but what does this actually buy us?)

I hadn't quite realised how revealing the CALM theorem actually was, in the previous
paper. It's essentially claiming to have precisely identified the theoretical structure
that leads to the need for synchronisation—if your program is not monotone, then it will
need to have all of its inputs to produce a result (or, at least, a _correct_ result, one
the rest of the system can trust). Traditional consistency models weaken how much the rest
of the system can trust the answer in recompense, but if you knew precisely when and where
you needed to synchronise, you could probably figure out how to do it off the critical
path.

Ah, they're just defining morphisms _on lattices_, sure. Their system understands the
distinction between general monotone functions on lattices and actual homomorphisms to
other lattices, and can treat them differently at runtime.

It's neat to note that, for instance, we can check `if` on booleans, but not `else`—`else`
is `if not`, and is thus non-monotonic.

We can define custom lattices too! Does Bloom check for monotonicity/structure-preserving?
If I understand 3.6, no; it assumes the functions you've marked as homomorphisms actually
are. I wonder how plausible it is to statically analyse whether a function is monotone or
a morphism…

It's also interesting (an interesting limitation?) that in, say, the shopping cart
example, a non-monotonic shopping cart isn't even observable until checkout. Not only is
the client just presumed to know what cart they want to checkout, they're presumed to
essentially provide this information to the system, taking on the burden of cart
synchronisation across multiple clients itself. This solution isn't significantly
different from the client being required to just store the cart locally—if they crash and
lose the lbound, there's no recovery, right? I'm thus not sure I'm convinced of this as a
solution to the standard shopping cart problem.
