# Conflict-free Replicated Data Types

Marc Shapiro, Nuno PreguicÌ§a, Carlos Baquero, Marek Zawirski

## Summary

In this seminal paper, the authors formally define the ideas of 
Conflict-free Replicated Data Types (CRDTs) to design and implement 
distributed systems. CRDTs promise to offer Strong Eventual Consistency 
(SEC) along with High Availability and Partition Tolerance.

Strong Eventual Consistency promises that all correct replicas will 
eventually reach the same state as long as they can communicate. While being
weaker than linearizability, this condition offers a stronger guarantee than
causality.

CRDTs utilize properties of sets such as commutative property, associavity,
and idempotence to design systems that are conflict-free. This ensures that
expensive and unreliable conflict resolution procedures to not happen. The
system works by avoiding conflict, rather than solving conflict. This can 
help us achieve monotonicity in the growth of our data, allowing SEC.

CRDTs can be divided into two categories CvRDTs - Convergent Replicated Data
Types, and CmRDTs - Commutative Replicated Data Types. CvRDTs work by 
passing and maintaining state of data among replicas to ensure correctness.
CmRDTs work instead on operations instead of states. The paper later goes 
on to prove that CmRDTs and CvRDTs are interchangable and collectively 
refers to them as CRDTs.
 
## Interesting Points

The authors state that they solved CAP theorem! I find that to be a rather 
bold and misleading claim. Strong Eventual Consistency is not the same as
Linearizability, and eventual convergence does not mean you will return 
consistent results in case of partitions. 

However CRDTs help us avoid strong conflict resolution mechanisms such as
consensus which is really valuable. CRDTs however will require extensive 
rewrite of the current systems to ensure all the required properties. 

The idea of CRDTs is along the lines of what was formalized as the CALM
conjecture [http://bloom-lang.net/calm/] : Consistency As Logical Monotonicity. If you can ensure
monotonicity, and updates are commutative, associative, and idempotent,
consistency can be achieved without coordination. 

## Research level question

How widely are CRDTs used in modern systems? Are there any drawbacks of
CRDTs? Are there some operations that are not possible with CRDTs?

Considering the widespread use of consensus mechanisms and systems that
need heavy coordination, it seems like CRDTs are unsuitable for 
a large class of modern applications. While the paper discusses some data
structures, hierarchical data structures or complex structures such as
ordered queues would be hard to implement using this approach.

## Closing thoughts

The paper gives us a useful insight on CRDTs, and along with the next paper,
it will help us create systems that can grow without conflict or 
coordination and still guarantee strong eventual consistency.

