# Declarative Programming over Eventually Consistent Data Stores

KC Sivaramakrishnan, Gowtham Kaki, Suresh Jagannathan

## Summary

The authors introduce QUELEA programming model, to allow contract specification
and enforcement on eventually consistent data stores. QUELEA uses a declarative
approach which is implemented as an extension of Haskell. This means it can be
easily added on top of any data stores, with shims. The authors add it on top of
Cassandra, and present evaluation through two modern application clones.

The authors state that this approach works even better in conflict-free
scenarios and demonstrate that with the help of a replicated data type. The
contract system, places constraints in program executions. The authors reason
about 3 consistency levels : eventual, causal, and strong.

The authors demonstrate implementations of session guarantees using QUELEA and
extend it to transactional systems and evaluate it by implementing several
practical implementations to gauge overhead.

## Interesting Points

The authors mention conflict-free/ coordination-free and replicated data types,
yet stop short of mentioning CRDTs (except the keywords and references). I
wonder why, the paper describes CRDTs multiple times, without their name.

The lattice presented for session guarantees is well drawn and interesting,
however it is not particularly useful other than the fact that combining stuff
gives you combined stuff.

I found their choice of a banking app to be really curious, since eventually
consistent stores are not typically the target of banking applications,

Is implementing a twitter clone required for distributed systems papers? I think
many of these twitter clones must be better programmed than Twitter itself :P.
On a serious note, it would be helpful to have graphs discussing evaluation than
a wall of text, specially comparisons to the state of art. Makes it easy to
compare trade-offs.

## Research level question

What is the difference between Contracts and Constraints? It seems to me that
this paper implemented (a fairly decent) constraint system using Haskell to
enforce certain guarantees. While this is a great implementation, surely this
has been done before?

## Closing thoughts

The paper was well written, however a pattern I see in most programming language
x distributed systems is they present the raw performance, but do not
necessarily compare themselves to other applications, which is important.
