# Donâ€™t Settle for Eventual: Scalable Causal Consistency for Wide-Area Storage with COPS

Wyatt Lloyd, Michael J. Freedman, Michael Kaminsky, and David G. Andersen

## Summary

The authors introduce Causal+ consistency, or causal consistency with 
convergent conflict resolution. For the conflic resolution, they use the
principle of "last writer wins". They present COPS, a rather lazily 
acronymed Key-Value store built on this idea, and support transactions in 
COPS-GT an even more lazily named modification of the key value store.

The authors state that the earlier implementations were Causal+ too, but did
not have great scalability. The system they have in mind is an ALPS system
Availability, Low Latency, Partition-tolerance and Scalability being the
important required properties.

Since linearizability is impossible to achieve in this scenario, the best
level of consistency you can guarantee is Causal. However Causality places
no restrictions on partitions diverging permanently with different data. 
This is however a desirable property, and that's where the convergent 
conflict resolution is required.

The conflict detection adds a dependency on the previous version for key 
update, causing a dependency check to happen, in order to detect conflicts
which then are resolved using the last write wins rule.
 
## Interesting Points

The chief contribution of this paper is the scalable convergent conflict 
handling the COPS system offers. However the paper seems to be split upon
what to talk about. It talks about ALPS, and a significant chunk of the 
paper is dedicated to the key value store and its evaluation, but from my
understanding of it, COPS is a proof of concept rather than a key-value
store they plan to release or design. 

It just seemed to me that more space could have been given the the conflict
handline (relegated to 1 paragraph) as opposed to the client libraries and 
consistency models.

The results look good, however the comparison with other systems seems to 
bee limited and focused on only LOG exchange. The dependency vs throughput
graphs are useful, but most of the evaluation is limited to COPS and COPS-GT


## Research level question

The authors claim that Causal+ consistency (done their way) is the best 
possible consistency condition you can get for a system that focuses on 
ALPS. Is this true? Can you do better?

## Closing thoughts

I do not think the paper was well written. It is extremely self indulgent
(we are the first/ this is the best possible multiple times) and makes some
bold claims for what seems to be a fairly straightforward idea. 

The paper isn't well organized or written, it is repetitive, it focuses on
minute details where unnecessary and glosses over where it would have been
helpful, it is repetitive. 
